Project Title:
Remote Temperature & Humidity Monitoring with ESP32, DHT11, and MQTT

Project Overview:
In this project, you'll build an Internet of Things (IoT) solution that reads environmental data—specifically temperature and humidity—from a DHT11 sensor connected to an ESP32 board. The ESP32 will connect to your WiFi network and publish the sensor readings using the MQTT protocol. On your Lightning Studio Desktop Server, which runs an MQTT broker (e.g., Mosquitto), you'll subscribe to the relevant topics to observe the incoming sensor data in real time.

Project Goals:
Measure Environment:
Continuously read temperature and humidity values from the DHT11 sensor using the ESP32.

Network Communication:
Transmit the sensor data over WiFi via MQTT to a central server.

Remote Monitoring:
Receive, log, and display the sensor readings on your Lightning Studio Desktop Server, allowing you to monitor the environmental conditions remotely.

Scalability & Extendibility:
Create a foundation that you can later expand—for instance, by adding data logging, visualization dashboards, or integrating additional sensors.

Hardware Requirements:
ESP32 Development Board:
The central microcontroller with built-in WiFi.

DHT11 Sensor:
A low-cost sensor to measure temperature and humidity.

Breadboard & Jumper Wires:
For prototyping connections.

Power Supply:
A USB cable or appropriate power source for the ESP32.

Software & Tools:
Arduino IDE:
For writing and uploading your ESP32 code.

Ensure you have the ESP32 board definitions installed.
DHT Sensor Library:
To interface with the DHT11 sensor (e.g., Adafruit DHT Library).

PubSubClient Library:
For MQTT communication from the ESP32.

MQTT Broker (Mosquitto):
Installed on your Lightning Studio Desktop Server.

Command to install:
bash
Copy
Edit
sudo apt update && sudo apt install mosquitto mosquitto-clients -y
MQTT Client Tool:
(e.g., mosquitto_sub) to subscribe and view messages from your MQTT broker.

Step-by-Step Implementation:
Hardware Setup:

Connect the DHT11 Sensor:
Wire the sensor to the ESP32. Typically:
Data Pin: Connect to a digital I/O pin (e.g., GPIO 4).
Power & Ground: Connect the sensor’s VCC to 3.3V/5V (as required) and GND to the ground.
Double-check your wiring before powering up.
Software Setup on ESP32:

WiFi Connection:
Write code to connect the ESP32 to your WiFi network using your SSID and password.
Sensor Reading:
Use the DHT library to read temperature and humidity values from the DHT11.
MQTT Publishing:
Configure the ESP32 to connect to your MQTT broker (using its IP address on your local network) and publish the sensor data to a topic (e.g., "home/sensors/dht11").
Example snippet:
cpp
Copy
Edit
if (!client.connected()) {
  client.connect("ESP32_Client");
}
String payload = "temp=" + String(temperature) + "&humidity=" + String(humidity);
client.publish("home/sensors/dht11", payload.c_str());
Loop:
Continuously read sensor data and publish updates every few seconds.
Server Setup on Lightning Studio Desktop:

Install and Start Mosquitto Broker:
Verify that Mosquitto is running on your server.
Subscribe to the MQTT Topic:
Open a terminal on the server and run:
bash
Copy
Edit
mosquitto_sub -h localhost -t "home/sensors/dht11"
This will allow you to see the sensor data being published by the ESP32.
Testing & Debugging:

Monitor Serial Output:
Use the Serial Monitor in the Arduino IDE to verify that the ESP32 connects to WiFi and reads sensor values.
Observe MQTT Data:
Confirm that messages are being received on the server by watching the output of your mosquitto_sub command.
Troubleshoot:
If data isn’t showing up, verify the network settings, MQTT broker connection, and sensor wiring.
Expected Outcome:
Once implemented, your ESP32 should successfully read data from the DHT11 sensor and send it via MQTT to your Lightning Studio Desktop server. On the server side, you should see continuous updates of the temperature and humidity values, confirming that your remote monitoring system is working.

Visualization:
Use tools like Grafana or a simple web dashboard to visualize the data in real time.